🕵️ Introduce lib for `gardener-node-agent` (#8249)
gardener/gardener: docs/concepts/node-agent.md

# Gardener Node Agent

> The goal of the `gardener-node-agent` is to bootstrap a machine into a worker node and maintain node-specific components, which run on the node and are unmanaged by Kubernetes (e.g. the controller runtime, the kubelet service, ...).

Reviewer: What do you mean with `controller runtime` in this context? Did you mean `container runtime`? Then again, the container runtime is already expected to be present in the operating system.

Author: I was confused myself and replaced it with systemd units, whcih is more specific and correct.

It effectively is a Kubernetes controller deployed onto the worker node.

## Basic Design

> This section describes how the `gardener-node-agent` works, what its responsibilities are and how it is installed onto the worker node.

Reviewer: Maybe this sentence should be ordered in the same way as the whole section. In the sentence installation is the last topic, but in the section it is the first one.
It is somewhat confusing if I start reading and want to know how it works, but get information about how it is installed instead.

Author: Great suggestion! I changed the sections and merged Architecture with Basic Design. Now the installation phase is a separate section.

> In this section it is described how the `gardener-node-agent` works, what its responsibilities are and how it is installed onto the worker node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how the `gardener-node-agent` works, what its responsibilities are and how it is installed onto the worker node.
```

> To install the `gardener-node-agent` onto a worker node, there is a very small bash script called `gardener-node-init.sh`, which is installed on the node with cloud-init data. This script's sole purpose is downloading and starting the `gardener-node-agent`. The binary artifact is downloaded as an [OCI artifact](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md), removing the `docker` dependency on a worker node. At the beginning, two architectures of the `gardener-node-agent` are supported: `amd64` and `x86`. In the same manner, the kubelet has to be provided as an OCI artifact.

Reviewer: Do you want to link to the shell script in the repository? It would help developers who want to dive into the code.

Author: Linked :+1:

> To install the `gardener-node-agent` onto a worker node, there is a very small bash script called `gardener-node-init.sh`, which is installed on the node with cloud-init data. This script's sole purpose is downloading and starting the `gardener-node-agent`. The binary artifact is downloaded as an [OCI artifact](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md), removing the `docker` dependency on a worker node. At the beginning, two architectures of the `gardener-node-agent` are supported: `amd64` and `x86`. In the same manner, the kubelet has to be provided as an OCI artifact.

Reviewer: > removing the `docker` dependency on a worker node

Please decide whether you want to describe the previous solution and the benefits of the new one or only the new one. Currently, this part stands alone and will only ever make sense to someone who knows the previous solution.

Author: Decided to describe the current solution. Removed that sentence

> To install the `gardener-node-agent` onto a worker node, there is a very small bash script called `gardener-node-init.sh`, which is installed on the node with cloud-init data. This script's sole purpose is downloading and starting the `gardener-node-agent`. The binary artifact is downloaded as an [OCI artifact](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md), removing the `docker` dependency on a worker node. At the beginning, two architectures of the `gardener-node-agent` are supported: `amd64` and `x86`. In the same manner, the kubelet has to be provided as an OCI artifact.

Reviewer: > `amd64` and `x86`

Are you sure about this one? I would have expected support for `amd64` and `arm64`. We do not support 32-bit most of the time. Therefore, I find it surprising to find it here.

Author: @majst01 can you have a look on this?

Reviewer 2: @ScheererJ we discussed this together with the folks responsible for your CI build pipeline whether we can move to OCI artefacts instead of docker-images. I would prefer to do so, but this will need that we also migrate existing hyperkube images to OCI images as well which means double the storage.

With OCI images multi arch support is still possible.

Reviewer: @majst01 I do not understand your point.

From my point of view, there are two supported architectures in the gardener universe. Those are `amd64` (sometimes also referred to as `x86-64`) and `arm64`. `x86` refers to 32-bit Intel/AMD processor architecture, which is less commonly used nowadays. This is why I wonder if you want to introduce an old platform here or simply used the wrong name.

Reviewer 3: I agree to @ScheererJ. We are supporting `arm64` shoots for a while now and we must not break this feature.
On the other hand, there is not even a  `x86` version (32 bit) of `kubelet` anymore ([ref](https://www.downloadkubernetes.com/)). Thus, it would not make sense to support this architecture anyway.

Author: I assume that was a typo. As we haven't implemented the build process of the node agent, I'll remove the mention of supported platforms. The node agent should always support the same architectures as Gardener itself

> To install the `gardener-node-agent` onto a worker node, there is a very small bash script called `gardener-node-init.sh`, which is installed on the node with cloud-init data. This script's sole purpose is downloading and starting the `gardener-node-agent`. The binary artifact is downloaded as an [OCI artifact](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md), removing the `docker` dependency on a worker node. At the beginning, two architectures of the `gardener-node-agent` are supported: `amd64` and `x86`. In the same manner, the kubelet has to be provided as an OCI artifact.

Reviewer: > In the same manner, the kubelet has to be provided as an OCI artifact.

What do you mean? I do not get this.

Author: The kubelet will be delivered through an OCI artifact, too. Clarified that sentence.

> Along with the init script, a configuration for the `gardener-node-agent` is carried onto the worker node at `/etc/gardener/node-agent.config`. This configuration contains things like the shoot's kube-apiserver endpoint, the according certificates to communicate with it, the bootstrap token for the kubelet, and so on.

Reviewer: You mention the path of the configuration file explicitly, but you do not tell readers where the script or the agent will be located. That information may be interesting as well.

Author: As all constants are already available in this PR for `gardener-node-init.sh`, I added the path.
But currently the path for `gardener-node-agent` cannot be derived from the current implementation and will be configured in an upcoming PR. Shall we already document it in the upcoming way or should we fill in the path in the future?

Reviewer: You can add a probable path and change it if required in the next pull request. This way the documentation is already now close to the real thing without any wildcards.

Author: Perfect, added the path.

In a bootstrapping phase, the `gardener-node-agent` sets itself up as a systemd service. It also executes tasks that need to be executed before any other components are installed, e.g. formatting the data device for the kubelet.

> After the bootstrap phase, the `gardener-node-agent` runs a systemd service watching on secret resources located in the `kube-system` namespace. There is a secret resource that contains the `OperatingSystemConfig` to reconcile. The OSC secret exists for every worker group of the shoot cluster and is named accordingly. Applying the OSC finally installs the kubelet + configuration on the worker node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the bootstrap phase, the `gardener-node-agent` runs a systemd service watching on secret resources located in the `kube-system` namespace. There is a secret resource that contains the `OperatingSystemConfig`. The OSC secret exists for every worker group of the shoot cluster and is named accordingly. When `gardener-node-agent` applies the OSC, it installs the kubelet + configuration on the worker node.
```

## Architecture

> ![Design](./images/gardener-nodeagent-architecture.drawio.svg)

Reviewer: What is the nodeagent API visible in the diagram? It is not mentioned in the architecture section at all.

Author: Updated

> This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. It starts with the downloader OSC being transferred through the userdata to a machine through the machine-controller-manager (MCM). The bootstrap phase of the `gardener-node-agent` will then happen as described in the previous section.

Reviewer: Previously, the `OperatingSystemConfig` was referred to as a `secret`. In the diagram it looks like something else. What is it?

Author: At first `OperatingSystemConfig` is a Resouce. But for every worker pool, a corresponding `cloud-config-<X>` secret will be generated / rendered out of the OSC. See [How does Gardener bootstrap the machines?](https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/extensions/operatingsystemconfig/#how-does-gardener-bootstrap-the-machines).

I'll revisit the doc and try to be more explicit wether we mean the secret or the resource.

> This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. It starts with the downloader OSC being transferred through the userdata to a machine through the machine-controller-manager (MCM). The bootstrap phase of the `gardener-node-agent` will then happen as described in the previous section.

Reviewer: > It starts with the downloader OSC being transferred through the userdata...

I do not understand the sentence. What is `the downloader OSC`?

Author: I guess it meant "downloaded". Changed to `the operating system config (OSC)`

> This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. It starts with the downloader OSC being transferred through the userdata to a machine through the machine-controller-manager (MCM). The bootstrap phase of the `gardener-node-agent` will then happen as described in the previous section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. It starts with the downloader OSC being transferred through the userdata to a machine through the `machine-controller-manager` (MCM). The bootstrap phase of the `gardener-node-agent` will then happen as described in the previous section.
```

## Reasoning

> The `gardener-node-agent` is a replacement for what was called the `cloud-config-downloader` and the `cloud-config-executor`, both written in `bash`. The `gardener-node-agent` gets rid of the sheer complexity of these two scripts, combined with scalability and performance issues urges their removal.

Reviewer: Please rephrase the last sentence.

With the new Architecture we gain a lot, let's describe the most important gains here.

### Developer Productivity

Because we all develop in go day by day, writing business logic in `bash` is difficult, hard to maintain, almost impossible to test. Getting rid of almost all `bash` scripts which are currently in use for this very important part of the cluster creation process will enhance the speed of adding new features and removing bugs.

### Speed

Until now, the `cloud-config-downloader` runs in a loop every 60sec to check if something changed on the shoot which requires modifications on the worker node. This produces a lot of unneeded traffic on the api-server and wastes time, it will sometimes take up to 60sec until a desired modification is started on the worker node.

> By using the controller-runtime we can watch for the `node`, the`OSC` in the `secret`, and the shoot-access-token in the `secret`. If any of these object changed, and only then, the required action will take effect immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the controller-runtime we can watch for the `node`, the `OSC` in the `secret`, and the shoot-access-token in the `secret`. If any of these object changed, and only then, the required action will take effect immediately.
```

> This will speed up operations and will reduce the load on the api-server of the shoot dramatically.

Reviewer: > dramatically

Will it though? I guess it will reduce latency between a change is requested and it is performed. It will also reduce load of `kube-apiserver`. However, in my opinion the latter part would only be significant for larger clusters. Maybe you should adapt the sentence accordingly.

## Scalability

> Actually the `cloud-config-downloader` add a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart takes a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which eventually interrupts service availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `cloud-config-downloader` add a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart takes a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which eventually interrupts service availability.
```

```

> TODO: The `gardener-node-agent` could do this in a much intelligent way because it watches the `node` object. The gardenlet could add some annotation which tells the `gardener-node-agent` to wait for the kubelet in a coordinated manner. The coordination could be in chunks of nodes and wait for them to finish and then start with the next chunk. Also a equal time spread is possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TODO: The `gardener-node-agent` could do this in a much more intelligent way because it watches the `node` object. The gardenlet could add some annotation which tells the `gardener-node-agent` to wait for the kubelet in a coordinated manner. The coordination could be in chunks of nodes and wait for them to finish and then start with the next chunk. Also a equal time spread is possible.
```

> ```

Reviewer: Why not add this in a section future work/outlook or something similar? It helps understand what we want to achieve now and what might come later.

Author: Added a `Future Development` section and improved the wording.

Decision was made to keep the existing jitter mechanism which calculates the kubelet-download-and-restart-delay-seconds on the controller itself.

### Correctness

The configuration of the `cloud-config-downloader` is actually done by placing a file for every configuration item on the disk on the worker node. This was done because parsing the content of a single file and using this as a value in `bash` reduces to something like `VALUE=$(cat /the/path/to/the/file)`. Simple but lacks validation, type safety and whatnot.
With the `gardener-node-agent` we introduce a new API which is then stored in the `gardener-node-agent` `secret` and stored on disc in a single yaml file for comparison with the previous known state. This brings all benefits of type safe configuration.
Because actual and previous configuration are compared, removed files and units are also removed and stopped on the worker if removed from the `OSC`.

### Availability

> Previously the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the `systemd-units` on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd-unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will remove unneeded `kubelet` restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the `systemd-units` on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd-unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will remove unneeded `kubelet` restarts.
```

# Gardener Node Agent

> The goal of the `gardener-node-agent` is to bootstrap a machine into a worker node and maintain node-specific components, which run on the node and are unmanaged by Kubernetes (e.g. the kubelet service, systemd units, ...).

Reviewer: Please be consistent with regards to `kubelet`, i.e. either use `kubelet` or kubelet, but please stick to one.
I prefer `kubelet`.

Author: Picked `kubelet`.

It effectively is a Kubernetes controller deployed onto the worker node.

## Architecture and Basic Design

> ![Design](./images/gardener-nodeagent-architecture.drawio.svg)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Design](./images/gardener-nodeagent-architecture.svg)
```
Please remove `drawio` from the filename.

Author: Removed.

> This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. On the left side it starts with an [`OperatingSystemConfig`](../extensions/operatingsystemconfig.md) resource (`OSC`) with a corresponding worker pool specific `cloud-config-<worker-pool>` secret being passed by reference through the userdata to a machine by the `machine-controller-manager` (MCM)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This figure visualizes the overall architecture of the `gardener-node-agent`. On the left side, it starts with an [`OperatingSystemConfig`](../extensions/operatingsystemconfig.md) resource (`OSC`) with a corresponding worker pool specific `cloud-config-<worker-pool>` secret being passed by reference through the userdata to a machine by the `machine-controller-manager` (MCM).
```

> On the right side the `cloud-config` secret will be extracted and used by the `gardener-node-agent` after being installed. Details on this can be found in the next section.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On the right side, the `cloud-config` secret will be extracted and used by the `gardener-node-agent` after being installed. Details on this can be found in the next section.
```

> Finally the `gardener-node-agent` runs a systemd service watching on secret resources located in the `kube-system` namespace like our `cloud-config` secret that contains the `OperatingSystemConfig`. When `gardener-node-agent` applies the OSC, it installs the `kubelet` + configuration on the worker node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Finally, the `gardener-node-agent` runs a systemd service watching on secret resources located in the `kube-system` namespace like our `cloud-config` secret that contains the `OperatingSystemConfig`. When `gardener-node-agent` applies the OSC, it installs the `kubelet` + configuration on the worker node.
```

> Finally the `gardener-node-agent` runs a systemd service watching on secret resources located in the `kube-system` namespace like our `cloud-config` secret that contains the `OperatingSystemConfig`. When `gardener-node-agent` applies the OSC, it installs the kubelet + configuration on the worker node.

Reviewer: Same as above.

## Installation and Bootstrapping

This section describes how the `gardener-node-agent` is initially installed onto the worker node.

> In the beginning, there is a very small bash script called [`gardener-node-init.sh`](../../pkg/component/extensions/operatingsystemconfig/original/components/containerd/templates/scripts/init.tpl.sh), which will be copied to `/var/lib/gardener-node-agent/gardener-node-init.sh` on the node with cloud-init data. This script's sole purpose is downloading and starting the `gardener-node-agent`. The binary artifact is extracted from an [OCI artifact](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md) and lives at `/usr/local/bin/gardener-node-agent`. At the beginning, two architectures of the `gardener-node-agent` are supported: `amd64` and `x86`. The `kubelet` should also be contained in the same OCI artifact.

Reviewer: The supported architectures are still dubious. We would want `amd64`/`x86-64` and `arm64`. There is no real need for `x86`.

Reviewer 4: Still unresolved

> Along with the init script, a configuration for the `gardener-node-agent` is carried over to the worker node at `/var/lib/gardener-node-agent/configuration.yaml`. This configuration contains things like the shoot's kube-apiserver endpoint, the according certificates to communicate with it, the bootstrap token for the kubelet, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Along with the init script, a configuration for the `gardener-node-agent` is carried over to the worker node at `/var/lib/gardener-node-agent/configuration.yaml`. This configuration contains things like the shoot's `kube-apiserver` endpoint, the according certificates to communicate with it, the bootstrap token for the `kubelet`, and so on.
```

> In a bootstrapping phase, the `gardener-node-agent` sets itself up as a systemd service. It also executes tasks that need to be executed before any other components are installed, e.g. formatting the data device for the kubelet.

Reviewer: Again: kubelet.

## Reasoning

The `gardener-node-agent` is a replacement for what was called the `cloud-config-downloader` and the `cloud-config-executor`, both written in `bash`. The `gardener-node-agent` implements this functionality as a regular controller and feels more uniform in terms of maintenance.

> With the new Architecture we gain a lot, let's describe the most important gains here.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the new architecture we gain a lot, let's describe the most important gains here.
```

### Developer Productivity

> Because we all develop in go day by day, writing business logic in `bash` is difficult, hard to maintain, almost impossible to test. Getting rid of almost all `bash` scripts which are currently in use for this very important part of the cluster creation process will enhance the speed of adding new features and removing bugs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since the Gardener community develops in Golang day by day, writing business logic in `bash` is difficult, hard to maintain, almost impossible to test. Getting rid of almost all `bash` scripts which are currently in use for this very important part of the cluster creation process will enhance the speed of adding new features and removing bugs.
```

Author: Good suggestion. But I preferred  `Go` over `Golang`. Is that fine?

### Speed

> Until now, the `cloud-config-downloader` runs in a loop every 60sec to check if something changed on the shoot which requires modifications on the worker node. This produces a lot of unneeded traffic on the api-server and wastes time, it will sometimes take up to 60sec until a desired modification is started on the worker node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Until now, the `cloud-config-downloader` runs in a loop every `60s` to check if something changed on the shoot which requires modifications on the worker node. This produces a lot of unneeded traffic on the API server and wastes time, it will sometimes take up to `60s` until a desired modification is started on the worker node.
```

> By using the controller-runtime we can watch for the `node`, the `OSC` in the `secret`, and the shoot-access-token in the `secret`. If any of these object changed, and only then, the required action will take effect immediately.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By writing a "real" Kubernetes controller, we can watch for the `Node`, the `OSC` in the `Secret`, and the shoot-access token in the `secret`. If any of these object changed, and only then, the required action will take effect immediately.
```

> This will speed up operations and will reduce the load on the api-server of the shoot especially for large clusters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This will speed up operations and will reduce the load on the API server of the shoot especially for large clusters.
```

(same elsewhere)

## Scalability

> The `cloud-config-downloader` adds a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart takes a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which eventually interrupts service availability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `cloud-config-downloader` adds a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart takes a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which potentially interrupts service availability.
```

> The `cloud-config-downloader` adds a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart takes a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which potentionally interrupts service availability.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `cloud-config-downloader` adds a random wait time before restarting the `kubelet` in case the `kubelet` was updated or a configuration change was made to it. This is required to reduce the load on the API server and the traffic on the internet uplink. It also reduces the overall downtime of the services in the cluster because every `kubelet` restart transforms a node for several seconds into `NotReady` state which potentionally interrupts service availability.
```

Decision was made to keep the existing jitter mechanism which calculates the `kubelet-download-and-restart-delay-seconds` on the controller itself.

### Correctness

> The configuration of the `cloud-config-downloader` is actually done by placing a file for every configuration item on the disk on the worker node. This was done because parsing the content of a single file and using this as a value in `bash` reduces to something like `VALUE=$(cat /the/path/to/the/file)`. Simple but lacks validation, type safety and whatnot.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The configuration of the `cloud-config-downloader` is actually done by placing a file for every configuration item on the disk on the worker node. This was done because parsing the content of a single file and using this as a value in `bash` reduces to something like `VALUE=$(cat /the/path/to/the/file)`. Simple, but it lacks validation, type safety and whatnot.
```

> With the `gardener-node-agent` we introduce a new API which is then stored in the `gardener-node-agent` `secret` and stored on disc in a single yaml file for comparison with the previous known state. This brings all benefits of type safe configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the `gardener-node-agent` we introduce a new API which is then stored in the `gardener-node-agent` `secret` and stored on disk in a single YAML file for comparison with the previous known state. This brings all benefits of type safe configuration.
```

Because actual and previous configuration are compared, removed files and units are also removed and stopped on the worker if removed from the `OSC`.

### Availability

> Previously, the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the `systemd-units` on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd-unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will remove unneeded `kubelet` restarts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Previously, the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the `systemd-units` on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd-unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will prevent unneeded `kubelet` restarts.
```

> Previously, the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the `systemd-units` on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd-unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will prevent unneeded `kubelet` restarts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Previously, the `cloud-config-downloader` simply restarted the systemd units on every change to the `OSC`, regardless which of the services changed. The `gardener-node-agent` first checks which systemd unit was changed, and will only restart these. This will prevent unneeded `kubelet` restarts.
```

### Future Development

The `gardener-node-agent` opens up the possibilty for further improvements.

> Necessary restarts of the `kubelet` could be deterministic instead of the aforementioned random jittering. In that case the `gardenlet` could add annotations across all nodes. As the `gardener-node-agent` watches the `node` object, it could wait with `kubelet` restarts, OSC changes or react immediately. Ciritical changes could be performed in chunks of nodes in serial order, but an equal time spread is possible, too.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Necessary restarts of the `kubelet` could be deterministic instead of the aforementioned random jittering. In that case, the `gardenlet` could add annotations across all nodes. As the `gardener-node-agent` watches the `Node` object, it could wait with `kubelet` restarts, OSC changes or react immediately. Critical changes could be performed in chunks of nodes in serial order, but an equal time spread is possible, too.
```
